README.md, before:

# CsvQuery

![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/entreya/csvquery/build.yml?branch=main)
![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0.0-blue)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green)
![Go](https://img.shields.io/badge/go-1.21+-00ADD8?logo=go&logoColor=white)
![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/php-8.1+-777BB4?logo=php&logoColor=white)

**CsvQuery** is a high-performance query engine that treats massive CSV files (10GB - 1TB+) like searchable databases. It uses a **PHP + Go Sidecar Architecture** to achieve sub-millisecond query latencies without the overhead of traditional database systems.

## ✨ Key Features

- 🚀 **Blazing Fast**: SIMD-accelerated CSV parsing (AVX2/SSE4.2) at 10GB/s+
- 📊 **Massive Scale**: Tested on 18M+ rows, 10GB+ files
- 💾 **Memory Efficient**: Mmap-based access with LZ4-compressed indexes
- 🔍 **Yii2-like API**: Familiar fluent query builder for PHP developers
- ⚡ **Zero-IO Queries**: COUNT operations bypass CSV reads entirely via index metadata
- 🔄 **Live Updates**: Sidecar update system for mutable data in immutable CSVs

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

CsvQuery operates as a sidecar. Your PHP application communicates with a high-performance Go daemon via **Unix Domain Sockets (UDS)**.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "PHP Application Layer"
        A[Your PHP App] --> B[CsvQuery]
        B --> C[ActiveQuery]
        C --> D[GoBridge]
        D --> E[SocketClient]
    end

    subgraph "Go Sidecar Engine"
        E <== "JSON over UDS" ==> F[UDS Daemon]
        F --> G[Query Engine]
        G --> H[Index Reader]
        G --> I[SIMD Scanner]
        H --> J[LZ4 Decompressor]
    end

    subgraph "Disk Storage"
        K[(Raw CSV File)]
        L[(.cidx Indexes)]
        M[(.bloom Filters)]
        N[(_updates.json)]
    end

    G -.- K
    H -.- L
    G -.- M
    G -.- N
```

### Key Technologies

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **Parsing** | AVX2/SSE4.2 SIMD | Scan CSV delimiters at hardware speed |
| **Compression** | LZ4 | 10x faster decompression than Gzip |
| **Storage** | mmap | Zero-copy file access |
| **Communication** | Unix Domain Sockets | ~1ms latency vs ~200ms for process spawning |

---

## 📦 Installation

### Requirements

| Platform | Requirements |
|----------|-------------|
| **All** | PHP 8.1+, Go 1.21+ |
| **Linux/macOS** | Unix Domain Socket support (recommended) |
| **Windows** | TDM-GCC or MSYS2 for CGO (optional) |

### Via Composer

```bash
composer require entreya/csvquery
```

The Go binary is built automatically on install. If Go is not available, pre-compiled binaries for your platform are included.

### Build Commands

```bash
# Build for current platform
composer build

# Build for all platforms
composer build:all

# Clean all binaries
composer build:clean
```

### Manual Build

```bash
php scripts/build.php           # Build for current OS/arch
php scripts/build.php --all     # Build all platforms
```

### Windows Notes

Windows users need GCC for CGO support. Choose one:

**TDM-GCC (Recommended):**
1. Download from [jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc](https://jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc/)
2. Install MinGW-w64 variant
3. Add `C:\TDM-GCC-64\bin` to PATH

**MSYS2:**
```powershell
# In MSYS2 terminal
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-gcc
```

> See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed platform-specific setup.

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

```php
<?php
require 'vendor/autoload.php';

use Entreya\CsvQuery\Core\CsvQuery;

// 1. Initialize with your CSV file
$csv = new CsvQuery('/path/to/data.csv', [
    'indexDir' => '/path/to/indexes',  // Optional: defaults to CSV directory
    'workers' => 8,                     // Optional: parallel workers for indexing
]);

// 2. Create indexes for fast searching (one-time operation)
$csv->createIndex(['STATUS', 'CATEGORY']);

// 3. Query with fluent API
$results = $csv->find()
    ->select(['ID', 'NAME', 'STATUS'])
    ->where(['STATUS' => 'active'])
    ->andWhere(['>', 'SCORE', 80])
    ->orderBy(['SCORE' => SORT_DESC])
    ->limit(100)
    ->all();

// 4. Iterate efficiently with generators
foreach ($csv->find()->where(['CATEGORY' => 'premium'])->each() as $row) {
    echo $row['NAME'] . "\n";
}

// 5. Aggregations
$count = $csv->find()->where(['STATUS' => 'active'])->count();
$total = $csv->find()->groupBy('CATEGORY')->sum('AMOUNT');
```

---

## 📖 API Reference

### CsvQuery (Entry Point)

```php
$csv = new CsvQuery(string $csvPath, array $options = []);
```

**Options:**
| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `indexDir` | string | CSV directory | Where to store index files |
| `separator` | string | `,` | CSV column separator |
| `workers` | int | CPU count | Parallel workers for indexing |
| `memoryMB` | int | 500 | Memory limit per worker (MB) |
| `binaryPath` | string | Auto-detect | Custom path to Go binary |

**Methods:**
- `find(): ActiveQuery` - Start a new query
- `where($condition, $value = null): ActiveQuery` - Start query with WHERE
- `createIndex(array $columns, bool $verbose = false): bool` - Create indexes
- `hasIndex(string|array $column): bool` - Check if index exists
- `dropIndex(string|array $column): bool` - Remove an index
- `clearIndexes(): int` - Remove all indexes
- `getHeaders(): array` - Get column names
- `insert(array $row): void` - Insert a single row
- `batchInsert(array $rows): void` - Insert multiple rows
- `update(array $attributes, array $conditions = []): int` - Update rows
- `addColumn(string $name, string $default = ''): void` - Add new column

### ActiveQuery (Query Builder)

```php
$query = $csv->find();
```

**Condition Methods:**
- `where($condition, $value = null): self` - Set WHERE clause
- `andWhere($condition, $value = null): self` - Add AND condition
- `orWhere($condition, $value = null): self` - Add OR condition
- `filterWhere(array $condition): self` - WHERE ignoring empty values

**Modifier Methods:**
- `select(array $columns): self` - Select specific columns
- `orderBy(array|string $columns): self` - Set ORDER BY
- `groupBy(array|string $columns): self` - Set GROUP BY
- `limit(int $limit): self` - Set LIMIT
- `offset(int $offset): self` - Set OFFSET
- `indexBy(string|callable $column): self` - Index results by column
- `asArray(bool $value = true): self` - Return arrays instead of Row objects

**Execution Methods:**
- `all(): array` - Get all matching rows
- `one(): ?Row` - Get first matching row
- `count(): int` - Count matching rows
- `sum(string $column): float` - Sum column values
- `average(string $column): float` - Average column values
- `min(string $column): mixed` - Minimum value
- `max(string $column): mixed` - Maximum value
- `each(): Generator` - Iterate with generator
- `explain(): array` - Get query execution plan

### Condition Syntax

CsvQuery supports Yii2-style conditions:

```php
// Hash format (implicit AND)
->where(['STATUS' => 'active', 'TYPE' => 'premium'])

// Operator format
->where(['>', 'SCORE', 80])
->where(['BETWEEN', 'AGE', 18, 65])
->where(['IN', 'CATEGORY', ['A', 'B', 'C']])
->where(['LIKE', 'NAME', '%john%'])

// Nested conditions
->where(['OR',
    ['STATUS' => 'active'],
    ['AND',
        ['>', 'SCORE', 90],
        ['TYPE' => 'vip']
    ]
])
```

---

## 🔄 Query Lifecycle

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant App as PHP Application
    participant CQ as CsvQuery
    participant AQ as ActiveQuery
    participant Bridge as GoBridge
    participant Socket as SocketClient
    participant Daemon as Go UDS Daemon
    participant Engine as QueryEngine
    participant Disk as Filesystem

    App->>CQ: new CsvQuery($path)
    App->>CQ: find()->where(['ID' => '123'])->one()
    CQ->>AQ: new ActiveQuery($this)
    AQ->>Bridge: query(...)
    
    alt Socket Mode
        Bridge->>Socket: getInstance()
        Socket->>Socket: ensureConnected()
        Socket->>Daemon: {"action":"select","where":{"ID":"123"}}
    end

    Daemon->>Engine: NewQueryEngine(config)
    Engine->>Engine: findBestIndex()

    alt Index Found
        Engine->>Disk: Read .cidx sparse index
        Engine->>Engine: Binary search for key
        Engine->>Disk: Read & decompress LZ4 block
        Engine->>Disk: fseek() to CSV offset
    else Full Table Scan
        Engine->>Disk: mmap CSV file
        Engine->>Engine: Parallel SIMD scan
    end

    Engine-->>Daemon: {offset: 12345, line: 500}
    Daemon-->>Socket: JSON response
    Socket-->>Bridge: Parse response
    Bridge->>Disk: Read row at offset
    Bridge-->>AQ: Hydrate Row model
    AQ-->>App: Row object
```

---

## ⚡ Performance

Benchmarks on **10GB CSV** (18.3M rows) with MacBook M3 Max / 64GB RAM:

### Indexing Performance

| Task | Throughput | Time |
|------|------------|------|
| Full File Indexing | ~400,000 rows/sec | 50 seconds |
| Composite Index (2 cols) | ~350,000 rows/sec | 55 seconds |

### Query Latency

| Query Type | Hits | Latency |
|------------|------|---------|
| COUNT(*) no filter | N/A | ~10ms |
| COUNT with indexed filter | 0 | ~14ms |
| COUNT with indexed filter | 150K | ~25ms |
| SELECT with filter | 1K rows | ~50ms |
| Full table scan | N/A | ~2000ms |

> [!TIP]
> **Zero-IO Index Scans**: If your query (e.g., `COUNT(*)`) can be satisfied entirely by index metadata, the engine skips reading the CSV file altogether.

---

## 🛠️ CLI Reference

The `csvquery` binary can be used directly for maintenance and debugging:

```bash
# Create indexes
./bin/csvquery index --input data.csv --columns '["STATUS", "CATEGORY"]' --verbose

# Query from command line
./bin/csvquery query --csv data.csv --where '{"STATUS":"active"}' --count

# Start daemon server
./bin/csvquery daemon --socket /tmp/csvquery.sock

# Show version
./bin/csvquery version
```

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `index` | Create indexes from CSV |
| `query` | Execute queries against CSV |
| `daemon` | Start Unix Domain Socket server |
| `write` | Append data to CSV |
| `version` | Show version information |

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```
csvquery/
├── src/
│   ├── php/                # PHP source files (namespace: Entreya\CsvQuery\)
│   │   ├── Core/           # Entry point, CSV handling
│   │   │   └── CsvQuery.php
│   │   ├── Query/          # Query building
│   │   │   ├── ActiveQuery.php
│   │   │   └── Command.php
│   │   ├── Bridge/         # Go binary communication
│   │   │   ├── GoBridge.php
│   │   │   └── SocketClient.php
│   │   └── Models/         # Data wrappers
│   │       ├── Row.php
│   │       ├── Cell.php
│   │       └── Column.php
│   └── go/                 # Go source files
│       ├── main.go
│       ├── go.mod
│       └── internal/       # Internal packages
├── bin/                    # Pre-compiled Go binaries
├── tests/                  # PHP & Go tests
├── ARCHITECTURE.md         # Detailed architecture docs
├── composer.json
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

> See [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed module documentation.

---

## 🧪 Testing

### PHP Tests

```bash
composer install
./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/
```

### Go Tests

```bash
cd src/go
go test -v ./internal/...
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./internal/query/
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## 📜 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by [Yii2 ActiveQuery](https://www.yiiframework.com/doc/api/2.0/yii-db-activequery)
- LZ4 compression via [pierrec/lz4](https://github.com/pierrec/lz4)
- SIMD optimizations inspired by [simdjson](https://github.com/simdjson/simdjson)

Commit message:

docs: clarify pure Go support for Windows
- Remove GCC/MinGW requirement from CONTRIBUTING.md
- Remove TDM-GCC instructions from README.md
- Clarify that binaries are statically linked (CGO_ENABLED=0)
- Update release docs for v1.2.2

README.md, after:

# CsvQuery

![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/entreya/csvquery/build.yml?branch=main)
![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0.0-blue)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green)
![Go](https://img.shields.io/badge/go-1.21+-00ADD8?logo=go&logoColor=white)
![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/php-8.1+-777BB4?logo=php&logoColor=white)

**CsvQuery** is a high-performance query engine that treats massive CSV files (10GB - 1TB+) like searchable databases. It uses a **PHP + Go Sidecar Architecture** to achieve sub-millisecond query latencies without the overhead of traditional database systems.

## ✨ Key Features

- 🚀 **Blazing Fast**: SIMD-accelerated CSV parsing (AVX2/SSE4.2) at 10GB/s+
- 📊 **Massive Scale**: Tested on 18M+ rows, 10GB+ files
- 💾 **Memory Efficient**: Mmap-based access with LZ4-compressed indexes
- 🔍 **Yii2-like API**: Familiar fluent query builder for PHP developers
- ⚡ **Zero-IO Queries**: COUNT operations bypass CSV reads entirely via index metadata
- 🔄 **Live Updates**: Sidecar update system for mutable data in immutable CSVs

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

CsvQuery operates as a sidecar. Your PHP application communicates with a high-performance Go daemon via **Unix Domain Sockets (UDS)**.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "PHP Application Layer"
        A[Your PHP App] --> B[CsvQuery]
        B --> C[ActiveQuery]
        C --> D[GoBridge]
        D --> E[SocketClient]
    end

    subgraph "Go Sidecar Engine"
        E <== "JSON over UDS" ==> F[UDS Daemon]
        F --> G[Query Engine]
        G --> H[Index Reader]
        G --> I[SIMD Scanner]
        H --> J[LZ4 Decompressor]
    end

    subgraph "Disk Storage"
        K[(Raw CSV File)]
        L[(.cidx Indexes)]
        M[(.bloom Filters)]
        N[(_updates.json)]
    end

    G -.- K
    H -.- L
    G -.- M
    G -.- N
```

### Key Technologies

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **Parsing** | AVX2/SSE4.2 SIMD | Scan CSV delimiters at hardware speed |
| **Compression** | LZ4 | 10x faster decompression than Gzip |
| **Storage** | mmap | Zero-copy file access |
| **Communication** | Unix Domain Sockets | ~1ms latency vs ~200ms for process spawning |

---

## 📦 Installation

### Requirements

| Platform | Requirements |
|----------|-------------|
| **All** | PHP 8.1+, Go 1.21+ |
| **Linux/macOS** | Unix Domain Socket support (recommended) |
| **Windows** | None (Binary is statically linked) |

### Via Composer

```bash
composer require entreya/csvquery
```

The Go binary is built automatically on install. If Go is not available, pre-compiled binaries for your platform are included.

### Build Commands

```bash
# Build for current platform
composer build

# Build for all platforms
composer build:all

# Clean all binaries
composer build:clean
```

### Manual Build

```bash
php scripts/build.php           # Build for current OS/arch
php scripts/build.php --all     # Build all platforms
```

### Windows Notes

The Windows binary is statically linked and does not require MinGW, Cygwin, or WSL to run. Just use the `.exe` as is.

> See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed platform-specific setup.

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

```php
<?php
require 'vendor/autoload.php';

use Entreya\CsvQuery\Core\CsvQuery;

// 1. Initialize with your CSV file
$csv = new CsvQuery('/path/to/data.csv', [
    'indexDir' => '/path/to/indexes',  // Optional: defaults to CSV directory
    'workers' => 8,                     // Optional: parallel workers for indexing
]);

// 2. Create indexes for fast searching (one-time operation)
$csv->createIndex(['STATUS', 'CATEGORY']);

// 3. Query with fluent API
$results = $csv->find()
    ->select(['ID', 'NAME', 'STATUS'])
    ->where(['STATUS' => 'active'])
    ->andWhere(['>', 'SCORE', 80])
    ->orderBy(['SCORE' => SORT_DESC])
    ->limit(100)
    ->all();

// 4. Iterate efficiently with generators
foreach ($csv->find()->where(['CATEGORY' => 'premium'])->each() as $row) {
    echo $row['NAME'] . "\n";
}

// 5. Aggregations
$count = $csv->find()->where(['STATUS' => 'active'])->count();
$total = $csv->find()->groupBy('CATEGORY')->sum('AMOUNT');
```

---

## 📖 API Reference

### CsvQuery (Entry Point)

```php
$csv = new CsvQuery(string $csvPath, array $options = []);
```

**Options:**
| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `indexDir` | string | CSV directory | Where to store index files |
| `separator` | string | `,` | CSV column separator |
| `workers` | int | CPU count | Parallel workers for indexing |
| `memoryMB` | int | 500 | Memory limit per worker (MB) |
| `binaryPath` | string | Auto-detect | Custom path to Go binary |

**Methods:**
- `find(): ActiveQuery` - Start a new query
- `where($condition, $value = null): ActiveQuery` - Start query with WHERE
- `createIndex(array $columns, bool $verbose = false): bool` - Create indexes
- `hasIndex(string|array $column): bool` - Check if index exists
- `dropIndex(string|array $column): bool` - Remove an index
- `clearIndexes(): int` - Remove all indexes
- `getHeaders(): array` - Get column names
- `insert(array $row): void` - Insert a single row
- `batchInsert(array $rows): void` - Insert multiple rows
- `update(array $attributes, array $conditions = []): int` - Update rows
- `addColumn(string $name, string $default = ''): void` - Add new column

### ActiveQuery (Query Builder)

```php
$query = $csv->find();
```

**Condition Methods:**
- `where($condition, $value = null): self` - Set WHERE clause
- `andWhere($condition, $value = null): self` - Add AND condition
- `orWhere($condition, $value = null): self` - Add OR condition
- `filterWhere(array $condition): self` - WHERE ignoring empty values

**Modifier Methods:**
- `select(array $columns): self` - Select specific columns
- `orderBy(array|string $columns): self` - Set ORDER BY
- `groupBy(array|string $columns): self` - Set GROUP BY
- `limit(int $limit): self` - Set LIMIT
- `offset(int $offset): self` - Set OFFSET
- `indexBy(string|callable $column): self` - Index results by column
- `asArray(bool $value = true): self` - Return arrays instead of Row objects

**Execution Methods:**
- `all(): array` - Get all matching rows
- `one(): ?Row` - Get first matching row
- `count(): int` - Count matching rows
- `sum(string $column): float` - Sum column values
- `average(string $column): float` - Average column values
- `min(string $column): mixed` - Minimum value
- `max(string $column): mixed` - Maximum value
- `each(): Generator` - Iterate with generator
- `explain(): array` - Get query execution plan

### Condition Syntax

CsvQuery supports Yii2-style conditions:

```php
// Hash format (implicit AND)
->where(['STATUS' => 'active', 'TYPE' => 'premium'])

// Operator format
->where(['>', 'SCORE', 80])
->where(['BETWEEN', 'AGE', 18, 65])
->where(['IN', 'CATEGORY', ['A', 'B', 'C']])
->where(['LIKE', 'NAME', '%john%'])

// Nested conditions
->where(['OR',
    ['STATUS' => 'active'],
    ['AND',
        ['>', 'SCORE', 90],
        ['TYPE' => 'vip']
    ]
])
```

---

## 🔄 Query Lifecycle

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant App as PHP Application
    participant CQ as CsvQuery
    participant AQ as ActiveQuery
    participant Bridge as GoBridge
    participant Socket as SocketClient
    participant Daemon as Go UDS Daemon
    participant Engine as QueryEngine
    participant Disk as Filesystem

    App->>CQ: new CsvQuery($path)
    App->>CQ: find()->where(['ID' => '123'])->one()
    CQ->>AQ: new ActiveQuery($this)
    AQ->>Bridge: query(...)
    
    alt Socket Mode
        Bridge->>Socket: getInstance()
        Socket->>Socket: ensureConnected()
        Socket->>Daemon: {"action":"select","where":{"ID":"123"}}
    end

    Daemon->>Engine: NewQueryEngine(config)
    Engine->>Engine: findBestIndex()

    alt Index Found
        Engine->>Disk: Read .cidx sparse index
        Engine->>Engine: Binary search for key
        Engine->>Disk: Read & decompress LZ4 block
        Engine->>Disk: fseek() to CSV offset
    else Full Table Scan
        Engine->>Disk: mmap CSV file
        Engine->>Engine: Parallel SIMD scan
    end

    Engine-->>Daemon: {offset: 12345, line: 500}
    Daemon-->>Socket: JSON response
    Socket-->>Bridge: Parse response
    Bridge->>Disk: Read row at offset
    Bridge-->>AQ: Hydrate Row model
    AQ-->>App: Row object
```

---

## ⚡ Performance

Benchmarks on **10GB CSV** (18.3M rows) with MacBook M3 Max / 64GB RAM:

### Indexing Performance

| Task | Throughput | Time |
|------|------------|------|
| Full File Indexing | ~400,000 rows/sec | 50 seconds |
| Composite Index (2 cols) | ~350,000 rows/sec | 55 seconds |

### Query Latency

| Query Type | Hits | Latency |
|------------|------|---------|
| COUNT(*) no filter | N/A | ~10ms |
| COUNT with indexed filter | 0 | ~14ms |
| COUNT with indexed filter | 150K | ~25ms |
| SELECT with filter | 1K rows | ~50ms |
| Full table scan | N/A | ~2000ms |

> [!TIP]
> **Zero-IO Index Scans**: If your query (e.g., `COUNT(*)`) can be satisfied entirely by index metadata, the engine skips reading the CSV file altogether.

---

## 🛠️ CLI Reference

The `csvquery` binary can be used directly for maintenance and debugging:

```bash
# Create indexes
./bin/csvquery index --input data.csv --columns '["STATUS", "CATEGORY"]' --verbose

# Query from command line
./bin/csvquery query --csv data.csv --where '{"STATUS":"active"}' --count

# Start daemon server
./bin/csvquery daemon --socket /tmp/csvquery.sock

# Show version
./bin/csvquery version
```

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `index` | Create indexes from CSV |
| `query` | Execute queries against CSV |
| `daemon` | Start Unix Domain Socket server |
| `write` | Append data to CSV |
| `version` | Show version information |

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```
csvquery/
├── src/
│   ├── php/                # PHP source files (namespace: Entreya\CsvQuery\)
│   │   ├── Core/           # Entry point, CSV handling
│   │   │   └── CsvQuery.php
│   │   ├── Query/          # Query building
│   │   │   ├── ActiveQuery.php
│   │   │   └── Command.php
│   │   ├── Bridge/         # Go binary communication
│   │   │   ├── GoBridge.php
│   │   │   └── SocketClient.php
│   │   └── Models/         # Data wrappers
│   │       ├── Row.php
│   │       ├── Cell.php
│   │       └── Column.php
│   └── go/                 # Go source files
│       ├── main.go
│       ├── go.mod
│       └── internal/       # Internal packages
├── bin/                    # Pre-compiled Go binaries
├── tests/                  # PHP & Go tests
├── ARCHITECTURE.md         # Detailed architecture docs
├── composer.json
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

> See [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed module documentation.

---

## 🧪 Testing

### PHP Tests

```bash
composer install
./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/
```

### Go Tests

```bash
cd src/go
go test -v ./internal/...
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./internal/query/
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## 📜 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by [Yii2 ActiveQuery](https://www.yiiframework.com/doc/api/2.0/yii-db-activequery)
- LZ4 compression via [pierrec/lz4](https://github.com/pierrec/lz4)
- SIMD optimizations inspired by [simdjson](https://github.com/simdjson/simdjson)
